Address IESG review comments (#31)
lamps-wg/cms-kyber: draft-ietf-lamps-cms-kyber.md

      org: National Institute of Standards and Technology
    title: "Cryptographic Module Validation Program"
    date: 2016

--- abstract

Module-Lattice-Based Key-Encapsulation Mechanism (ML-KEM) is a quantum-resistant key-encapsulation mechanism (KEM). Three parameter sets for the ML-KEM algorithm are specified by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in FIPS 203. In order of increasing security strength (and decreasing performance), these parameter sets are ML-KEM-512, ML-KEM-768, and ML-KEM-1024. This document specifies the conventions for using ML-KEM with the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) using the KEMRecipientInfo structure defined in “Using Key Encapsulation

> Mechanism (KEM) Algorithms in the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)” {{!RFC9629}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mechanism (KEM) Algorithms in the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)” (RFC 9629).
```

Per this part from RFC7322:

>    Similarly, the Abstract should be complete in itself.  It will appear
>    in isolation in publication announcements and in the online index of
>    RFCs.  Therefore, the Abstract must not contain citations.

# Introduction {#sec-introduction}

The Module Lattice Key Encapsulation Mechanism (ML-KEM) is an IND-CCA2-secure Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM) standardized in {{FIPS203}} by the NIST PQC Project {{NIST-PQ}}. ML-KEM is the name given to the final standardized version and is incompatible with pre-standards versions, often called "Kyber".

> {{!RFC9629}} which defines the KEMRecipientInfo structure for the use of KEM algorithms for the CMS enveloped-data content type, the CMS authenticated-data content type, and the CMS authenticated-enveloped-data content type. This document specifies the direct use of ML-KEM in the KEMRecipientInfo structure using each of the three parameter sets from {{FIPS203}}, namely MK-KEM-512, ML-KEM-768, and ML-KEM-1024.  It does not address or preclude the use of ML-KEM as part of any hybrid scheme.

Reviewer 2: Just grammar / sentence flow.

> kemct is the ciphertext produced for this recipient.

> kdf identifies the key-derivation algorithm. Note that the Key Derivation Function (KDF) used for CMS RecipientInfo process MAY be different than the KDF used within the ML-KEM algorithm. Implementations MUST support HKDF {{!RFC5869}} with SHA-256 {{!FIPS180=NIST.FIPS.180-4}}, using the id-alg-hkdf-with-sha256 KDF object identifier {{!RFC8619}}. As specified in {{!RFC8619}}, the parameter field MUST be absent when this object identifier appears within the ASN.1 type AlgorithmIdentifier. Implementations MAY support other KDFs as well.

> kekLength is the size of the key-encryption key in octets.

> > ukm is an optional random input to the key-derivation function. For ML-KEM, ukm doesn't provide any additional security benefits. Originators using ML-KEM MAY choose to send a ukm, though there is no reason to. For maximum interoperability, recipients using ML-KEM SHOULD accept and process the ukm. Failure to do so will result in the derivation of different keying material than the sender. Recipients that do not support the ukm field SHOULD gracefully discontinue processing when the ukm field is present.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how I missed this before, but I don't think this paragraph is accurate.

RFC9629 describes it as:

> ukm is optional user keying material. ... For example, the ukm value could include a nonce, application-specific context information, or an identifier for the originator.

So that can be more than random input, and could have meaningful security benefits for the protocol. For example, you could imagine a "Falko Attack" where an encrypted PDF as mistaken for an encrypted S/MIME. Feeding in some static string into UKM that binds the shared secret to the protocol would prevent that attack.

I suggest this re-wording of the paragraph:

> ukm is an optional additional keying material that binds the shared secret key to some protocol state, for example a nonce, transaction ID, application-specific context information, or an identifier for the originator. Since not all protocols built on top of CMS will make use of the ukm, CMS implementations MAY choose to not support ukm. Implementations that do not support ukm SHOULD by gracefully discontinue processing when the ukm field is present since failure to do so will result in the derivation of different keying material than the sender.

To me, this seems like a trivial part of the spec; it really doesn't save you any effort to implement it, but if we want to make it optional, I think that's the way to do it.

Author: I don't think I agree with those suggested changes.  That sort of wording is appropriate for the KEMRecipientInfo specification, but this document is an algorithm profile of RFC 9629 so should stick to algorithm specifics.  RFC 9629 says "A KEM algorithm may place requirements on the ukm value." In the case of ML-KEM, there are no additional UKM requirements, so we should just stick to saying that.  There are other algorithms, like static DH where the algorithm requires the use of a UKM nonce to ensure a different encryption key is generated each time, but this doesn't apply for ML-KEM.

And with that disagreement, I think the text we had here previously was also too much and should just say "ML-KEM doesn't care about ukm, do RFC 9629".  I'll update the PR with proposed text.

BTW, a "Falko Attack" for encryption doesn't apply because it is handled by the content-type signed attribute.  The Falko Attack for signatures is due to a deficiency in CMS where both signed attribute or no signed attributes are allowed.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, "THE Falko attack" is about signatures ... but you could imagine "A falko attack" that applies to KEM context confusion.

I see your point about whether the algorithm places a requirement on the protocol for UKM ... ex.: MUST be present and at least x-bits of entropy for forwards-secrecy ... vs the protocol placing a requirement on the algorithm ... ex.: MUST bind a transaction nonce via the UKM in order to avoid replay attacks.
I suspect that in general, both directions are valid.

I think it's fair to treat both directions independently.
IE: "ML-KEM does require a UKM for any security guarantees and therefore leaves it optional and does not place any requirements on the length or structure of a UKM."
and also "Implementations SHOULD accept a UKM, and SHOULD gracefully discontinue processing if it does not".

Reviewer 2: ... oh wait.
... I'm dumb.
... you're right. ukm is completely handled at the CMS KEMRI layer via the KDF that's used to crunch the ML-KEM SS together with other CMS protocol data and produced the EnvelopedData symmetric encryption key.

Right, so _this_ document only needs to handle the forward direction of 

> ML-KEM does require a UKM for any security guarantees and therefore does not place any requirements on the length or structure of a ukm used at the CMS KEMRecipientInfo level.

Good afternoon. I'm awake now.

## Underlying Components {#sec-using-components}

When ML-KEM is employed in the CMS, the underlying components used within the KEMRecipientInfo structure SHOULD be consistent with a minimum desired security level.
Several security levels have been identified in NIST SP 800-57 Part 1 {{?NIST.SP.800-57pt1r5}}.

If underlying components other than those specified in {{sec-using-recipientInfo}} are used, then the following table gives the minimum requirements on the components used with ML-KEM in the KEMRecipientInfo type in order to satisfy the KDF and key wrapping algorithm requirements from {{Section 7 of RFC9629}}:

| Security Strength | Algorithm   | KDF preimage strength | Symmetric key-encryption strength |
|---                |---          |---                    |---                                |
| 128-bit           | ML-KEM-512  | 128-bit               | 128-bit                           |
| 192-bit           | ML-KEM-768  | 192-bit               | 192-bit*                          |
| 256-bit           | ML-KEM-1024 | 256-bit               | 256-bit                           |
{: #tab-strong title="ML-KEM KEMRecipientInfo component security levels"}

> * In the case of AES Key Wrap, a 256-bit key is typically used because AES-192 is not as commonly deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(*) In the case of AES Key Wrap, a 256-bit key is typically used because AES-192 is not as commonly deployed.
```
